# Translation Manual (unfoldingWord)

## License Information

**Translation Manual (unfoldingWord)** is based on and adapted from: _unfoldingWord® Translation Academy_, [unfoldingWord](https://unfoldingword.org/utw), 2022, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version (created `2025-10-16`) is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## Choosing a Source Text (id: 33400)

### Factors to Consider for a Source Text

Many translation teams will want to use a Bible translation in their Gateway Language as an additional source text, alongside the Literal and Simplified texts from unfoldingWord. This third text can serve as a model for how things can be said in a natural way for the Gateway Language. Another good possibility for this third (or fourth) source text is to choose a translation that exists in a language related to the target language. This can be especially helpful to see how those translators expressed the meaning in a clear and natural way for the related language. When choosing this source text, there are a number of factors that must be considered:

* **Statement of Faith** — Does the text agree with the Statement of Faith?
* **Translation Guidelines** — Does the text agree with the Translation Guidelines?
* **Language** — Is the text in a suitable language that translators and checkers understand well?
* **Copyrights, Licensing, and Source Texts** — Is the text released under a license that gives sufficient legal freedom?
* **Source Texts and Version Numbers** — Is the text the latest, most updated version?
* **The Original and Source Languages** — Does the translation team understand the difference between source languages and original languages?
* **Original Manuscripts** — Does the translation team understand about Original Manuscripts and Textual Variants?

It is important that the leaders of the churches in the language group agree that the source text is a good one. They should agree that it is an accurate translation of the original language texts and conveys the meaning in a clear and natural way for speakers of the Gateway Language or of a related language.

* **Associated Articles:** Original Manuscripts (ID: `33389@UWTranslationManual`); The Original and Source Languages (ID: `33394@UWTranslationManual`); Copyrights, Licensing, and Source Texts (ID: `33399@UWTranslationManual`); Source Texts and Version Numbers (ID: `33401@UWTranslationManual`); Textual Variants (ID: `33405@UWTranslationManual`); Statement of Faith (ID: `689667@UWTranslationManual`); Translation Guidelines (ID: `689672@UWTranslationManual`)

