# Translation Manual (unfoldingWord)

## License Information

**Translation Manual (unfoldingWord)** is based on and adapted from: _unfoldingWord® Translation Academy_, [unfoldingWord](https://unfoldingword.org/utw), 2022, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version (created `2025-10-16`) is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## Grammar Topics (id: 33279)

Grammar has two main parts: words and structure. Structure involves how we put words together to form phrases, clauses, and sentences. Here is a brief overview of Grammar Topics we will deal with in detail.

**Parts of Speech** — Every word in a language belongs to a category called a part of speech. (See Parts of Speech.)

**Sentences** — When we speak, we organize our thoughts in sentences. A sentence usually has a complete thought about an event or a situation or state of being. (See Sentence Structure.)

* Sentences can be statements, questions, commands, or exclamations. (See Exclamations.)
* Sentences can have more than one clause. (See Sentence Structure.)
* Some languages have both active and passive sentences. (See Active or Passive.)

**Possession** — This shows that there is a relationship between two nouns. In English it is marked with “of” as in “the love of God,” or with “’s” as in “God’s love,” or with a possessive pronoun as in “his love.” (See Possession.)

**Quotations** — A quotation is a report of what someone else has said.

* Quotations normally have two parts: Information about who said something and what the person said. (See Quotations and Quote Margins.)
* Quotations can be either direct quotes or indirect quotes. (See Direct and Indirect Quotations.)
* Quotes can have quotes within them. (See Quotes within Quotes.)
* Quotes can be marked to make it easy for readers to understand who said what. (See Quote Markings.)

* **Associated Articles:** Active or Passive (ID: `33258@UNKNOWN`); Parts of Speech (ID: `33300@UNKNOWN`); Possession (ID: `33303@UNKNOWN`); Direct and Indirect Quotations (ID: `33305@UNKNOWN`); Quote Markings (ID: `33306@UNKNOWN`); Quotes within Quotes (ID: `33307@UNKNOWN`); Sentence Structure (ID: `33311@UNKNOWN`); Sentence Types (ID: `33312@UNKNOWN`); Quotations and Quote Margins (ID: `33426@UNKNOWN`)

